This is kind of a departure for you.
We're talking with Gary Paulson here, this book, from what you've done previously.
Tell me a little bit about that, if you would.
Wait, you mean writing about the idea to write?
Yeah.
I ran it twice, and I wrote a book for children about it.
the whole thing cook for a while before I wrote about it.
It has such a devastating altering effect on your life.
It's permanent.
And I wanted to be able to evaluate a lot of that before I wrote about it, not kind of go crazy, but back off a little so I could see it.
So I waited a few years.
And of course, this is not a young adult book by any measure.
No, it's written for adults.
I started doing several adult works for Harcourt.
I've been doing a lot of young adult stuff, and I started hitting walls, strange walls, where I would want to write about something, and it would be too adult or too complex, perhaps, or too...
intricate maybe for young people.
And I would find out I have to back off a little.
So I decided then that I would do some work for adults.
Let's probe that for a while because now where you have written about the Iditarod for younger readers and now you're writing about it for the wider audience, what exactly, tell me about where you hit the wall, say, in the earlier treatment of this subject and how you were able to expand it for, you know, in this one.
When you write...
The depth, that's P?
Yeah, the sustaining difficulties of it.
What was that word again?
Sustaining difficulties.
Okay.
Sustaining, right?
Yeah, but when you write about that in
In the book for young people about the Iditarod, I wrote about a wolf kill, which I've seen several times, where they kill a deer.
And I've actually taken quite a bit of flack from that by all sort of conservative school boards and different people who say that it's too violent.
But it isn't necessarily violent, nearly as violent as the act.
And I wanted people to understand that wolves,
live that way.
And to some measure, dogs do too.
Dogs express a great deal of their life in violence.
They fight and they kill things and eat it if they can.
If I'm writing for adults, then I can go into those areas in more depth and talk about them.
Now, you mentioned the experience.
Was this book as much for you as it is for your readers?
I think so.
Winter Dance, in some measure, was a
was a release for me in the sense that I miss the dogs terribly.
Jesus, I miss the whole thing.
No, they're gone, right?
You sold them.
My heart went and I had to get rid of them.
How many did you have, by the way?
At the height, I think we had 90, 91 dogs.
And when my heart went bad, I think we were down to about 58 or 59, somewhere.
But as a telling point in this, about six weeks ago, seven weeks ago,
I went up to the Upper Peninsula, Michigan, and ran.
I did around teens.
Really?
Yeah, just still kind of looking at it, you know.
And how'd it feel?
It was great.
I didn't have any trouble.
I ran for three days off and on.
Not for the record, you mentioned heart troubles.
I was in the Boston airport today.
I found out about my heart.
Oh, wonderful.
Yeah.
You know, you hear about East Coast people being...
No, I just had a severe pain, and it stopped me dead, actually.
It wasn't a heart attack, but it was angina.
By the time I got back to, or angina, as the doctor corrected me.
By the time I got back to Minnesota, I knew I was in some kind of trouble, so I went to the hospital and did the test.
So you didn't do it, so the Boston thing didn't, you didn't stay here or anything?
No, no, I wasn't.
I was getting on the plane to go home when it happened.
And I think what happened was the last pork chop or the last butter pad or something put that little plug in there, and that was enough to give it.
Well, you cut it at the right time, that's for sure.
I was really lucky.
I got a warning.
You know, a lot of people don't get that warning.
And, of course, now you're living in a ranch down there, right?
I'm in the warm southwest, a beautiful country with clear skies.
This way she has a lot more light during the day.
She's here to deal with things.
Harcourt did very well by you.
I thought the color photographs, for instance.
That was a nice touch.
They didn't have to do that.
I took those slides.
On my first run, I took about 700 slides going across.
Most of them were no good.
I was being dragged to my face or going off cliffs.
But those in the book are slides that I actually took during the day.
Again, let's go back to the writing of the book.
As we said, you did this as much for yourself as you did for the readers.
What exactly do you discover about yourself in something like this?
Is this something as much for self-esteem?
I don't think it's esteem so much as surprise.
I never thought...
You know, I've been around a while and done the Army and some things, and I never thought of myself as being endurable or enduring, right?
I just never did, and I was really surprised when I finished the first race because it does take a really sustained effort.
I mean, it really does.
It's a long-term, you know, a 17-day gruel.
Marathon runners talk about hitting walls, and they're talking about
Well, you hit a wall every four or five hours.
I mean, it's something that you really have to get through.
And I was surprised at myself for being able to do it.
I really was.
And then to go back to actually run it twice was even more surprising.
And to think that I was going to keep doing this and would still be doing it if my heart hadn't gone on me.
I never thought I was that kind of a person.
I just never did.
really surprising.
The other thing that was surprising was that it made me realize that quality of life is everything.
That if you live unhappily, you might as well not live.
That there are ways to live where beauty is everything, sort of.
Was there ever – I mean, you mentioned – you made the comparison between this and running a marathon.
And, of course, this might just work up here because the Boston Marathon is coming up.
The thousands of people who participate in that, you know, only a handful ever expect to emerge victorious, to win.
For them, the experience is to run it and to finish it.
Is there a parallel there in this?
Very, very much so.
I never –
In my first race, number one, I was voted least likely to get out of Anchorage by the other people in the race.
And it was a valid opinion.
I mean, I was lucky to get out of Anchorage.
And I never fought in terms of competition.
By the second race, I did.
By the second race, I was thinking in terms of winning.
Really?
Yeah, and I should have won.
I had the best team in the race.
I honest to God did.
I had an astonishing dog team.
I easily pass Susan Butcher, Rick Swinton, any of those people.
How much is it, how much, well, you mentioned the dogs, but I mean now, how much is the dogs and how much is the driver?
It's about 95% dogs and 5% driver.
In my case, I was the 5% was my error in judgment that caused me to lose the race.
To not, in fact, not finish.
I scratched 80 miles from those.
So you'd never blame the dogs?
No, no.
They were absolutely magnificent.
Never had any trouble.
I mean, they were ready to go all the time.
So what was your error?
I got out on the sea ice at the wrong time and crossing Norton Sound.
And you got to cross 75 miles of ice, and I should have waited.
I should have waited.
Well, what was there there that you could have seen that you didn't?
Other people had tried and had not been able to do it, had been blown back.
And I thought, well, Libby got out there.
Libby Riddell's the first woman who won, and she made it.
And I kept thinking I could do it, and I just got blown back.
I should have just waited.
I was out there two and a half days, and I should have waited that time and just finished the race.
Or I should have gone sooner, even 15 hours sooner would have.
would have changed the structure of the race.
I didn't.
And this was my judgment call, which was a mistake.
So you were really here a competitor?
I was, yeah.
In fact, that team, with my handler running, who was a rookie the next year, he ran a race in Minnesota, 500 miler, called the Bear Race, which some people say is at least as hard as the Editarod.
It's grueling.
But anyway, all the Alaskan teams came down.
Susan Butcher, Rick Swenson, everybody came down there were going to sweep the race.
And my handler won the race, the first race he ever ran with my team.
He beat them all.
That's exciting, isn't it?
It was like winning the Super Bowl the first time he picked up a football.
Yeah.
um tell me about the iditarod uh you know in in any sense i mean it is a rather extraordinary event isn't it i mean it tests it tests everything i had an older man who was a native american who ran dogs in fact he might be the best tell me that he thought the iditarod was
Great.
Let's see if I can get that in any of my papers.
You know what I mean.
But there's some validity to that.
There's a shock that occurs to your system.
And it becomes so extreme so soon that you're in this sort of shock for about the first, oh, third of the race, just trying to adapt to things as they come at you.
And I think even after you've run it once, that hits the second race and the fifth race.
I mean, I sponsored a guy this year for his second race.
He ran last year and came in last.
He was a friend of mine.
It was his dogs I ran when I went up to Michigan.
I sponsored him again this year, and he busted his leg, tore it all to hell.
I mean, you know, he was thinking in terms of competition.
He was thinking, you know, he's going to go up there and maybe do all right, maybe be in the money.
He's got a really awful fracture.
He's got to have pins and silver screws and stuff put in, you know.
I guess I'm searching for, is the idea to write a metaphor for anything?
Combat.
No, I don't know that it is.
I think once you've run it, once you've run it, it alters the way you view everything after that.
So it's real easy to say that, okay, it's a metaphor for life or it's a metaphor for life.
But I think a lot of that is flavored by once you've run it, it changes the way you view things.
I don't think anything's hard anymore, you know, compared to that.
I mean, this last summer, I'll give you an example.
People have been talking about Harleys, you know, Harley-Davidson this and Harley.
I thought, well, Christ, it can't be that much.
So I went and bought one.
And I rode it around here for a while.
And I thought, well, what can you do with a Harley that would be the maximum expression to see what the hell they're all about?
So I took off from here and went up to Alaska and back.
I went up the Alcan.
No kidding.
Yeah, it took three weeks.
And I got back and people said, God, you know, you went up the Alcan.
But to me it was not much, frankly.
You know, I busted my left foot doing it.
I laid her over three times in construction zones and busted up my left big toe.
But I never, it didn't seem like much of a thing to me.
It wasn't anywhere near as hard as that race.
I think in that sense that it's very difficult to draw metaphors.
It's kind of like the Boston Marathon.
I could not run the marathon.
Probably even when I was healthy, I could not run it.
I could trudge it.
But I know that it's nothing compared to the Iditarod.
running it with 80 and 90 mile an hour winds.
And you aren't required to spend two weeks, sleep two weeks out in the wilderness.
You aren't sitting on a sled wearing a sanitary napkin because your asshole's bleeding.
So I had to, in both races, I used sanitary napkins.
I mean, it's an enormous difference.
People try to relate to, you know, marathons and that.
But it's simply not, it doesn't really relate to other races.
Areas of endeavor, I guess.
So then why do it?
Oh, God.
You are proving something.
It's like becoming a cave painting.
Say again?
You go back 10, 15,000 years.
The dogs don't know.
what year it is.
The dogs don't know anything about high-tech stuff or that you've got Teflon runners on your sled or any of this stuff.
The dogs are exactly like they were.
They haven't changed in millions of years or hundreds of thousands of years.
Sled dogs and dogs helping men work have been around many thousands of years.
So when you start running them,
kind of thinking, you go back to theirs.
And you become extremely, I don't know, ancient in your mind.
It's a wonderful feeling.
They recently, or in the last few years, I think, found this body of this Ice Age man in the Alps between... Oh, that was a great story.
Yeah, yeah.
But I understand exactly what he was like.
I mean, when they showed his little copper axe and his tools, his arrow shafts,
to keep his feet warm.
That's how I kept my feet warm.
I put grass in the bottom of my mucklucks.
And this is, well, what, 6,000 years between us, or eight?
Well, because it works.
Yeah, it does work.
And it worked then, and it works now.
There's a kind of beauty to that.
And I would run that son of a bitch every year until I died.
No kidding.
I really would.
But, of course, it's over.
I mean, you don't expect to.
It's over.
I can't.
I could perhaps run it with maybe if I had a bypass and did a bunch of shit, you know.
But the doctor said the stress would kill you.
And the doctor is a friend of mine.
So, I mean, he's just trying to be accurate.
And it isn't the physical drain so much as the mental activity.
You know, I'm not looking for a cosmic thing here, but are you a better person for this?
I think so.
I know I am in the way I view work.
I approach my life now as if it were Iditarod, end to end to end to end to end.
My writing, Harley, you know, whatever it is, it allows me to focus.
on things so that I can do the most with them or achieve the most with them.
And I think that has happened to many people who have run the race, not just me.
Of course, the book speaks for itself.
It's not necessary for me to ask you about the things that you discuss in the book.
What are you working on now, might I ask?
I had done a.
the trilogy and the working of the second book, which would be from my age of about 9 or 10 until I was 26, working in Hollywood.
That's great.
Well, listen, I won't take up too much of your time.
I wanted to get some quotes here.
I will be here until Friday night if you have any other questions.
Okay.
And then I leave on my killer tour.
Have you been interviewed by anyone up in Alaska?
No.
Well, I'm going to try and pitch it up there.
Well, good luck.
We'll see.
I just wish the bastards would return their phone calls.
There's a kind of arrogance in Alaska against people in the lower 48.
It's still there.
And they're very nice.
I mean, people are very nice.
They were always very nice to me.
I actually had one guy.
I had trained my dogs to sleep on little foam pads, and I got them off the ice.
You know, people will carry straw to do that, make straw beds for them, or have straw at the checkpoints, and I had these foam pads.
So one of the other mushers came up to me and said, God, that's a hell of an idea.
He says, it's too bad you're not from Alaska.
People would like it if you were from Alaska.
All right, great.
Listen, I'm going to let you go.
Okay.
Good luck, and I look forward to talking to you next time.
Yeah, we'll see you again.
Take care.
Nice talking to you.
Nice talking to you, too.
There we go.
Okay.
I love your book.
Thank you very much.
Explain to me why Marlowe, a 400-year-old mystery.
What energized you here?
Well, the fact that it is a mystery, one of those historical puzzles.
If you are a historian, then I always find them irresistible.
as a sort of punter, and this was what I felt that I could do something about and get my teeth into as an investigator.
Plus, Marlow has always been something of a hero of mine.
And let me also say that as an English major in college many years ago,
I've always been one to actually favor Marlowe over Shakespeare.
Well, yes, certainly in terms of some kind of free soul that comes out about the man himself.
Yeah, well, I mean, even the plays, I think, to the age of 29, play for play, he was the superior playwright, I think.
Yeah, well, that's certainly true, yes, exactly.
Yeah.
Shakespeare would probably go along with you, though.
I think so.
You know, they were both exactly the same age.
Anyway, go ahead.
I'm sorry to interrupt, but I share your enthusiasm for the man.
Let's start with that.
That's part of the answer, really, in that sense.
The man himself has fascinated me.
The period is one that has fascinated me, and the riddle, if you like, of his murder.
What made you think that you could crack it after four centuries?
Arrogance.
I was just going to say arrogance.
I didn't want to say it.
Let me say that, first of all, historical investigation, having done a little bit of it on this and other books,
It is extraordinary the extent to which you find, you go over things and see things that people haven't seen before, however well-trodden the path is.
Not that the matter of Marlow's death had been very well-trodden, but obviously it had been investigated.
So there is that.
I think, you know, you call up the papers and you'll see things in the papers and so on that people haven't seen before.
The second point I would make on that, in other words, that first point is basically saying, look for yourself.
Don't necessarily believe what others tell you when they have looked.
The second point I would say is that from the vantage point of, say, the mid-1980s, which is about when I started thinking about it, the whole understanding of the way the secret services worked, the intelligence services,
our understanding of it by that point had really become rather more subtle or rather more well-informed, rather more extensive than it had been before.
In other words, someone working in the 1920s, which was basically when the serious archival work on Marlowe, and particularly the matter of Marlowe's death, was being done by people like Hotson and Eccles and so on, Americans, I hasten to add, or
Canadians and Americans.
They did brilliant archival work, they did brilliant investigative work to some extent on the murder, but that whole context which I supply for it, the context of espionage and intelligence, I would say someone in the 1920s just didn't really have that kind of understanding of how these things
as we do now.
So there's a sort of historical trick of perspective, in a way, whereby someone writing, say, after the 1960s, in an English sort of rather parochial English perspective, I'm sort of thinking after the blunt Philby Burgess sort of revelations, you have equivalents over here, your Wilderness and Mirrors, your James, Jesus, Angles, or should that be Jesus?
you know, that whole awareness we have of how the complex, labyrinthine world of the Secret Services works, I really applied that, I believe, sort of, you know, not imposing it, but I applied it correctly to the case.
And, you know, perhaps someone
at least a generation ago looking at the case wouldn't really have understood that aspect in the way that we can.
Was there for you, to use a phrase from Watergate, the smoking pistol, was there a smoking pistol for you or was it really the body of evidence?
The smoking pistol to some extent was the
the nature of the three men who were left standing after 8 o'clock on the 30th.
And I think you quite correctly begin your study with them, by the way.
Yes, they were the ones that said to me, well, hell, if there isn't something fishy going on here, you know, where is there something fishy going on?
I mean, obviously, at the back of one's mind throughout all of this is the possibility that despite all the sort of
circumstances and everything else someone's uncovered, it still might have been an argument over the bill.
But having said that, I guess the smoking gun for me was the record of the nature of those three men that he met up with and in whose company he died.
They more than anything said to me,
There's something fishy going on here.
Any surprises for you as you – I mean, did you kind of go in with the notion that – I mean, there has been speculation, of course, that Marlowe was, in fact, killed.
I mean, that's not new.
No, I was kind of – it was the first.
But what you try to do is nail this thing down and – but you obviously proceeded with that notion.
Yes, I mean, I suppose, you know, those who would regard it as an insult will take it as such.
I mean, I would describe myself as a conspiracy theorist on it.
I think, you know, this was an age of conspiracy, so I think conspiracy theory is sort of to some extent legitimized by that context, although, of course, one has to nail it down.
I guess what I'm saying is what you found more or less validated what you felt.
as opposed to surprise you?
Yes, I suppose that would be true.
I mean, I suppose you could say I set out to... And there's nothing wrong with that.
I mean, it's obviously... To uncover a sort of Secret Service type plot, and to some extent that's what I did, although I don't know if I have uncovered exactly what did happen.
I don't really claim to have uncovered exactly what happened, merely to have illuminated the context of what it did, you know, and to lead us all up to that moment, even though one can't actually say what happened.
for sure, or what exact agenda was happening at that moment.
But yes, I certainly started off with the general idea that there was some kind of
dirty trick and nothing I've discovered has deflected me from that within that I'd say that the particular man who I end up pointing the finger at is not the one that I started off believing without wishing to bog your readers down or leaving it up to you as to how much you bog them down in the detail you know the man Robert Pooley was intuitively once suspect because he was
certainly the most sort of veteran intelligence or the veteran player in the secret game of those four men, including Marlow, who got up there.
He was the senior, if you like, of the four men, if you want to look at them in terms of as intelligence agents.
But he is not the one I end up
pointing the finger at as the actual villain of the piece.
In fact, the way it sort of seems to pan out from my findings is that he, if anyone, was to some extent there as a
protector of Marlowe, as perhaps Marlowe's superior or Marlowe's particular contact within that particular grouping of four men.
He is the one who is actually closest to Marlowe in terms of their allegiances
and so on.
How did you come to speculate on a motive, of course, if this were a trial?
You know, we have to have motive.
I'm not sure that one does is perhaps one answer to that.
You know, this is the sort of world in which people act out of the most opportunistic and sort of unconsidered motives.
they, to some extent, act and then put the reasons for their actions together afterwards, that certainly is something that emerges quite clearly from the sort of study of this world, of the intelligence world.
There are a lot of cowboys floating around, feeding off each other, betraying each other when it's convenient to do so, and it's within that rather
sort of unmotivated, but things happen which aren't motivated by any coherent political approach.
So one wouldn't necessarily...
One wouldn't necessarily find a totally coherent motive, but I believe one can find, and I believe I do find, the correct sort of context for it, which is this rivalry between Sir Walter Raleigh and the Earl of Essex, taking Marlow, as he was certainly believed to be, as a follower and friend of Raleigh's,
and taking one of the men he meets up with in Deptford, Nicholas Skeers, as a secret servant of the Earl of Essex's, which he certainly was, of the evidence.
This is one of the contributions I have made, I think, to really nail that particular connection between Skeers, who's there in the room in Deptford, and the Earl of Essex, and Essex's whole sort of intelligence
network which he used at the time.
So it's really sort of finding those contexts of allegiance, those contexts of former kind of commitment, who's belonging to who in that sort of Elizabethan sense, and finds really each of those four men have their connections and allegiances and it's really sort of taking it from there to work out
which one has the motive and the sort of context for actually killing.
You know, when you consider how little documentary information is available, say, on Shakespeare, you know, and we have Sean Bob's books on the documentary.
That's right, yeah.
life.
And really, there's basically a positive information, although what you have is very useful.
I guess what I'm saying is how surprised I am that you were able to learn as much as you did about those three men, I mean, who are otherwise anonymous Elizabethan men.
Yes, absolutely, they are, yes.
Well, with perhaps the exception of Pooley, who sits around and turns up in other contexts.
particularly the Barrington plot of a few years previously.
So people would perhaps have known a bit about him had he not been there the night that Marlow was killed.
Certainly the other two were totally obscure.
But you were actually able to get some insight into the characters.
Yes, I mean, it's amazing how much there is, in a way.
It's a question of finding it.
It amazes me, I have to say.
I mean, there is, you know, there is,
You go to the public record office, it's the main sort of problem sort of confronting the investigator is not the paucity of documentation in general.
But the significance, I guess.
Yeah, finding the significant piece amid the sort of mass of
and for one's own purpose is insignificant stuff.
I always go back to that guy, I forget his name, but remember he desperately wanted to find something on Shakespeare when he found that Belotte-Montjoie deposition.
Remember that thing when Shakespeare was living in Blackfriars, I guess?
Yes.
And he found that Shakespeare was deposed and would have brought it to a civil case.
This, I think, would be Leslie Hodson as well.
Yeah, I think it was, I forget who it was, I don't think it was Hodson, but it was some guy, I think it was a Canadian, though, and he was an otherwise anonymous guy, I mean, who really wanted to find something on Shakespeare and just started going through all the records over there and came up with this thing.
Well, it sort of ties back to a little bit what I said earlier, you know, that
if you go looking at yourself, you find there are bits, even where you think it's been very well trodden, for instance.
It's extraordinary what little bits have been, or little avenues have been missed.
And it's, I sort of think of it, it's like a sort of tuning into the galaxy, you know, this mass of white noise and static, and then suddenly you get this bleep of sort of some actual signal.
You know, you've got to wade through a mass of
Largely illegible and uninteresting.
How long did you work on this?
Actually, sort of top of my list of things and so on, three years.
That's pretty fast.
Previous to that, a lot of many years sort of generally sort of interested in the subject, three years specific research.
Now, I have your book, A Couple of News, here, and I was just looking for it as we spoke, and of course, you know, when the place is loaded down, that period, again, is a favorite of mine.
Did you more or less go into Marlowe from Nash, would you say?
I did indeed.
I would say it was researching on Nash that first really sort of got me interested in Marlowe, or in the case of Marlowe's death, I'd certainly been interested in Marlowe before,
but interested in the particular matter of his death, because I reckoned that Nash, well, certainly must have known quite a little bit about it, being the sort of guy he was anyway, quite a part of the fact he was a friend of Barlow's, and sort of speculating, as I did, perhaps a little wider the mark, and perhaps looking back on it, as to
what might or might not be discernible in Nash's pamphlets on the question of Marlowe's death.
And I did a little bit of thinking about it while writing the Nash book, which was now sort of 10, 12 years ago I was writing it.
Well, you mentioned Green, of course, but he shows up all over the place, doesn't he?
Yes, I mean, it was a very small world.
You know, that's one of the joys of it in a way.
You get into this world,
um you come back to it uh several years later to write a book about another writer but it's it's all the same you know they all knew each other they all lived down when you when you quoted the growth's worth of wit i thought for sure you'd mention the shakespeare thing reference in there yeah shakespeare's of course the one he was the yeah it is hard to pin down certainly this early stage of the 950 90s and he's doubtless in there but but the sort of intimacy of the scene is one of the things i love about it
It's such a small world.
It's such a sort of, in a way, it sort of seems almost rather amateurish.
You know, it's just these young guys all knocking around together in the same sort of taverns and hanging out at the bookstores and sort of these rather showy sort of disreputable young men.
And they're all, you know, the great sort of,
now consider the great sort of foundations of English relations literature.
I like the sort of you get that sort of you cross over from that rather
Was it difficult for you to refrain from talking about the literary end of it?
Not really, for that reason.
I feel the literary end of it has been talked about so much.
And that sort of idea that you break through that barrier.
But I think sometimes you risk losing the more general kind of a reader who might not know who the hell Christopher Maui is.
It's possible, although I think on the other hand, the general reader is not going to be very interested in a lot of comments about his plays either.
I mean, certainly in England it has proved to be vindicated to some extent by the fact the book sold rather better than anyone expected.
No kidding.
That was because it was about
a real drama sort of dodgy young man as opposed to about a famous English poet, you know.
In your mind, did Marlowe have a fatal flaw?
Oh, several.
Which one?
I mean, he was, well, I used the word dodgy just now.
I don't know if that translates into American very well.
Dodgy.
Would you spell it so I can get it right away somewhere?
D-O-D-G-Y.
Okay.
It means sort of shady and rather untrustful, yet also probably a bit charming, you know.
Rogish, perhaps?
Rogish, perhaps, yes, exactly.
But one wonders what he did to bring about his own demise.
Well, I think, yes.
I mean, one can say he's a victim of court injury, as I say in the book, but he's certainly not an innocent victim.
No.
He, well... Of course, he was only 29 years old, too.
We forget that.
I mean, that's the sort of tragic part of it all.
He's... He's fatal flaw.
Yeah, well...
That was just an off-wall question.
No, no, I'm trying to think.
You know, it's a good question.
I suppose, you know, he got in too deep to a game.
One gets the impression he's in this certainly not because he believes in upholding the government against the Catholic threat or because he, you know, it's not a matter of principle that draws Marlow into this game.
So it is more the idea that this is dangerous but rather exciting.
You'd like to think that, given the times and how dangerous they were, I mean, to really express your opinion, if it went against the grain, I mean, Shakespeare was a master of staying the hell out of trouble, wasn't he?
Yeah, that's what one gets.
He seems to have kept his...
This guy should have, I mean, you almost say, cool, take it easy, I mean, but he doesn't do that.
You know, he was certainly detested by many people, his contemporaries.
Marlow.
Marlow was.
What is your feeling for the guy?
How do you end up here?
Well, some of the sort of implications of what I've sort of found out about him,
to some extent what I've speculated about it on the basis of what I've found, are pretty, you know, they're pretty disturbing, if you like.
I mean, particularly, one thing that always, one thing that does worry me is this idea that it probably turns out that he was something of a spy on the people who were actually his patrons and protectors.
These characters like North Strange and the Earl of Northumberland
who we know to have been his patrons, but, you know, you look at it from this certain angle, you look at their slightly parlous political position, both as young, high-pedigree Catholics, looked on by Catholic revolutionaries as possible figureheads for a Catholic uprising, and so on and so forth.
You look at Marlowe in their entourage, you look at Marlowe's connections with the government espionage, sort of,
efforts, you think, well, of course, he's there partly because he's a poet and he's a witchy companion and they want him there, but he's also there because the government thinks it's useful for him.
And the idea he's probably, at least to some extent, sort of feeding back information to the government about what's going on in the circles of people like Lord Strange and the Earl of Northumber, in these rather disaffected intellectual circles.
So that's a point at which the idea that this is all a rather kind of roguish game that's involved in becomes something a little more nasty.
So you think, you know, well, I don't really like that.
And it's 400 years ago, but even so I don't really like it.
So, you know, I don't think everything...
I would, I'm a great admirer of Marlow, but it's certainly qualified to some extent by that feeling that, you know, there is an element of betrayal in the sort of things he was doing, and God knows, I mean, there's a whole lot of stuff that he was up to, no doubt, which one has the faintest idea about it.
It will be, you know, even worse.
Who knows what people suffered as a result of his activities.
There's a context, obviously.
This is the name of the game in those days to some extent.
Conversely, one doesn't actually know what kind of pressures he was under.
Are you surprised that a lot of the material that does exist was not destroyed or that there wasn't more of a cover-up than there might have been?
Well, I think the answer to that really is that
A lot of the stuff that we have available to us today as sort of archival historian has available to him that wasn't available at all to the average people either.
So we're reading private correspondence, we're reading official government or confidential government minutes.
But does it surprise you that it survived?
Well, I think in that sense it's not quite so surprising in that it survives only as part of confidential official government papers.
In other words, none of this stuff that one's using, or very little of the stuff that one's using,
would ever have been in any sense in the public domain.
So perhaps they didn't feel the need.
Yeah, they didn't really think the way we do today.
I mean, there was no reason to think that there would be inquiring reporters or journalists coming in and pouring over this stuff and, you know, exercising Freedom of Information Acts and things like that.
They were unaccountable, you know, and that was very, very unaccountable.
And as you say, they probably didn't entertain the possibility that it would ever
So they didn't, to some extent, feel the need to destroy things, but having said that, of course, who knows what was destroyed.
What would you have liked to have seen?
What were you hoping to find when you were going through that stuff that say that you didn't, that would have really closed the deal for you?
I never found what I believe must be the case, but I never found any document that physically, or specifically rather, linked Marlowe with those three people that he met up with.
I mean, obviously, the fact that they met up implies some kind of link, and all sorts of circumstantial links within the intelligence service.
You know what's a telling detail to me, and what I hadn't realized, is that they weren't in a tavern.
I mean, this was not just some kind of idle day in a bar, you know what I mean?
That's right.
That's a pretty interesting point to me.
Part of the disinformation, I mean, whether it's intended disinformation or whether it's just sort of the way that rumors and hearsays work, but the idea that it was a tavern all sort of changes the nature of the thing so radically, and one gets back behind that idea that
I think, yeah, as you say, it makes it a whole different story.
And, you know, one could regard that as, to some extent, a cover-up.
You know, the fact that everyone seems to think it was a tavern ball sort of almost... Spontaneous, but it doesn't seem to be that at all.
And, in fact, that he's killed long after the bill was, you know, I mean, it wasn't like where we're arguing over the checks on the table, you know, we're saying, anti-up, you know, that's not how it happened.
Yes, I mean, they've been together for at least seven to ten hours.
Well, they've been, no, at least eight hours.
Sure.
Because they meet at ten and they go for supper at six or eight hours, and then the killing happens unspecified for the time after that.
So it's, yeah, I mean, there's...
It's not just a, yeah, it's not just a quick drink together.
Wouldn't it be wonderful if there were some newspapers, you know, you could go to the morgue, you know, what we call them, pull the clips on the stuff.
Well, it's a double-edged thing, of course.
Once you've committed your theories to print, you're kind of dreading the sudden discovery of another bit of paper.
Yeah, the coroner's report is really maddening, too, isn't it, for what it doesn't tell you?
Yes.
I mean, I don't sort of go down the line that the coroner's report is in itself a kind of cover-up.
I mean, people have said this.
As we've said earlier, I'm not the first conspiracy theorist by any means.
People have certainly sort of suggested that, you know, this whole coroner's inquest was a deliberate cover-up in itself.
I don't myself see it that way.
I think it was a perfectly straight-up piece of
He was added to determine cause of death, I guess that's about it.
Yes, I mean, I think the cover-up is a question of what the witnesses told the coroner.
Why is the price of the dagger such a big deal?
I think I'm right in saying that it's something that's often mentioned in these coroner's reports because
the murder weapon became the sort of property or was confiscated as the property.
Oh, I see.
Therefore, the value of it was actually a sort of, you know, equivalent to the sort of polythene bag around the suspected controlled substances.
You know, it's a purely, I think, I'm right in saying, a purely administrative detail.
It might be also an idea that a 12-penny dagger tells us or told someone then what kind of dagger it was, you know, whether a 12-penny dagger was probably considered to be a certain size.
But it's, I don't think there's much that one can
discerned from it now.
It just always strikes me as a rather nice detail that it was a 12-penny dagger.
Of course, that's actually not by any means a cheap dagger, which is what I might think that is.
12 pence is actually, as I reckon, it's probably about 25 quid.
Can I ask you a question unrelated to this study and not for this piece?
but you are certainly well-versed in the Elizabethan period and the figures, the people.
I've recently written something, and it's a book that's under submission.
Oh, it's a book on bibliomania, on book madness through the centuries, and I have a chapter on Rule Britannia, the British book collectors.
Of course, I have a wonderful section on Robert Cotton,
And, you know, I can not find anywhere, and I'm suspecting that nobody's ever posited this, that Cotton and Shakespeare might have been friends and that Shakespeare might have read a lot of his things in Cotton's library.
It would certainly be possible, Nick.
I don't know of any
for evidence.
Believe me, I've scoured the sources on this.
I'm just wondering.
My sense is, and I'm kind of pleased about it, because I put forward, you know, I have a few things that I think, I suggest, for instance, that the model for Prospero might have been John Dee.
Ah, well, absolutely.
But I've never seen that, even Jeffrey Bullock doesn't say that.
Well, I think that, you know, I mean, Francis Yates is sort of,
That's fine, that's good.
I don't want to disappoint you by sort of saying someone said it before, but it has been.
Is that right?
That has been positive, certainly, yes.
It has.
That's fine, that's fine.
But you see, I don't know if you, are you familiar then with the, this has been, I think Aubrey reported that when Dee died,
when John Dee died, Cotton bought up a piece of land owned by him on the rumor that Dee had buried his books in the ground.
What does Prospero do at the end of the play?
He buries his books.
And beyond that,
Of course, if Shakespeare had been friendly with cotton, I mean, and here he brought Dee's stuff, maybe they sat around the fire and talked about these stories about the crazy old alchemist.
It's just a theory.
Of course, Johnson writes at great length about how he has a play, The Alchemist.
Absolutely, which again, The Alchemist and The Tempest, of course, are more or less
Exactly.
Well, I mean, I'm not trying to do anything revolutionary here, but I am certainly suggesting that where there were no libraries, formal libraries in those days, that I'm trying to demonstrate, you know, the contribution of these collectors.
Absolutely.
Well, Dee's library was, without doubt, one of the great sort of, you know,
meetings or places or places of pilgrimage for that is... Cotton, you mean?
Yeah.
Anyway, okay, that's just... Yates.
What was Yates's book, just by chance?
Francis Yates.
Well... That's Y-A, right?
Pardon?
Y-A-T-E-S.
Y-A-T-E-S, yeah.
Francis with an A-E.
Okay.
Oh, this is a woman.
Yeah.
She's a, she's a, I'll find it, I'll find it.
She's, well, she's dead now.
She's, she's, she died about 10 years ago.
Okay, no, no, I'm going to just, I'll find it.
I think the one you want to look at is, it's called the Occult Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age.
I've got to find that, okay.
It was published in about 1980, I should think.
Fine.
And it's a kind of summing up of her work.
So it's her last book.
Actually, I would like to find a scholarly reference that suggests, I mean, I was feeling a little uncomfortable suggesting this.
And now if I have somebody where I can reference this, this actually makes my position that much more stronger.
I would imagine she comes out and says it.
It certainly implies.
She also wrote a book called Shakespeare's Last Plays.
Well, of course, The Tempest is always taken to be the last one.
Again, I'm sure would certainly work around this idea.
But she's a great fan of Dee.
I mean, she's the great sort of...
Well, you can see why I'm a fan of your book.
I have quite a bit of interest in this subject.
Well, listen, I think I've got plenty of stuff here.
Yeah, I mean, I'm very grateful that you're – for your interest generally and for the possible article you're going to do on it.
Well, I am – I should also say I've been – I'm writing now for a number of newspapers.
Yeah.
I've been writing for this Worcester paper for a number of years.
You're up there, based at Worcester, are you?
Yeah, and I don't work at the paper anymore.
I freelance and I'm working on my own stuff.
But since January, I've been offering what I write to other newspapers, and I've got six of them taking it now, which is kind of remarkable for two months.
That's excellent.
I mean, I think, you know, what's kind of grabbed people's attention in England is the sort of whole idea that this spy business, as I said at the beginning, you know, this whole spy business, really, the essentials of it,
and even the details of it, really, have been going on for all this time, you know, and you sort of think of all these... Well, everybody thinks the spy thriller, you know, as a creature of the last, you know, began with 007.
Exactly, exactly, and it's all sort of modern stuff, and it's CIA... Exactly, yeah, it's not the case at all.
And suddenly you look back 400 years ago, I mean, you know, he was even recruited at Cambridge, like... Well, that's a great line.
That's a wonderful line.
You know, nothing changes, especially in the secret world.
There's a good quote to end the piece.
I always look for the kicker.
I know my lead, but I'm never happy until I have my kicker.
I think we're all set.
It's all there for you.
Well, thank you very much for your time.
It would be very nice talking to you.
Good luck with your project.
My project.
Okay.
With a little bit of luck, we'll see it at the beginning of the year.
I'm told we have an offer forthcoming.
It's a big book.
Big non-fiction books aren't in vogue right now, unfortunately.
Yeah, but they have a sort of life that the novels don't have.
They do indeed.
But, well, the title of the book, if you ever see it, is A Gentle Madness.
A Gentle Madness of Obibliomania.
Okay.
We all suffer from it a bit.
Don't we?
Okay.
Good luck with it.
Thank you, sir.
Nice to talk to you.
Take care.
Okay.
Bye-bye.